SONNET 18  
Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?  
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:  
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,  
And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:  
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,  
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;  
And every fair from fair sometime declines,  
By chance or nature’s changing course untrimmed;  
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,  
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;  
Nor shall Death brag thou wanderest in his shade,  
When in eternal lines to time thou growest:  
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,  
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.  

SONNET 116  
Let me not to the marriage of true minds  
Admit impediments. Love is not love  
Which alters when it alteration finds,  
Or bends with the remover to remove:  
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark  
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;  
It is the star to every wandering bark,  
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken.  
Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks  
Within his bending sickle’s compass come:  
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,  
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.  
If this be error and upon me proved,  
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.  

SONNET 130  
My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;  
Coral is far more red than her lips’ red;  
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;  
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.  
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,  
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;  
And in some perfumes is there more delight  
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.  
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know  
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;  
I grant I never saw a goddess go;  
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground:  
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare  
As any she belied with false compare.  

FROM VENUS AND ADONIS  
Even as the sun with purple-coloured face  
Had ta’en his last leave of the weeping morn,  
Rose-cheeked Adonis hied him to the chase;  
Hunting he loved, but love he laughed to scorn.  
Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,  
And like a bold-faced suitor ‘gins to woo him.  

Thrice-fairer than myself, thus she began,  
The field’s chief flower, sweet above compare,  
Stain to all nymphs, more lovely than a man,  
More white and red than doves or roses are;  
Nature that made thee with herself at strife,  
Saith that the world hath ending with thy life.  

FROM THE RAPE OF LUCRECE  
From the besieged Ardea all in post,  
Borne by the truthless wings of false desire,  
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,  
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire  
Which in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire  
And girdle with embracing flames the waist  
Of Collatine’s fair love, Lucrece the chaste.  

O, had the monster seen those lily hands  
Tremble, like aspen leaves, upon a lute,  
And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,  
He would not then have touched them for his life.  

